To finally conclude this section here,
there's one last concept I wanna dive in,
and that would be expressions and GitHub context.
Thus far in all our steps,
we had simple commands, which we just executed like this,
and that will very often be the case.
But sometimes, you also have certain actions
or commands that need some metadata from the environment.
For example, you could be working
with environment variables,
something we will explore later in the course.
To show you what I mean without getting too advanced,
I'll add a second workflow here,
which I'll just name output.yml
or that's the file name,
and I'll name the workflow Output information.
And I wanna trigger this workflow manually
with workflow_dispatch.
And now here, I'll just define one job,
which I'll name info,
and this job runs on ubuntu-latest.
And what I wanna do here
in my steps is I wanna output some meta information
that's automatically passed into these jobs and steps.
And this meta information is collectively named context.
GitHub actions creates some context data
with various pieces of information
about the event trigger
and the runner and other things
that can be accessed inside of these steps.
And to get a better feeling for the kind
of information you're getting,
which could be useful
for certain tasks you wanna perform here,
I'll just output some of the information we're getting.
For example, here in my first step,
I wanna output my GitHub context,
which is an object or a collection of data
with some general information
about this workflow and the event trigger.
Here I'll add the run key
to execute a command in the shell
and I'll output some information here.
However, this time, I don't wanna hard code some text
but instead, I wanna output
that data I'm getting from GitHub.
And for this, we're getting a special identifier,
which we can use in our command line here.
And that's the github identifier.
However, if I just write it like this,
I would just output the text GitHub here.
Instead to access this dynamic value,
this data object that's provided by GitHub here
in this line of code in this command,
I have to use a special syntax,
which is a dollar sign
and then two opening and two closing curly braces.
And now this syntax signals to GitHub
that this should now not be treated as text
that's output in the command line
or that's used like text in the command,
but that instead here we wanna access
some surrounding metadata,
some metadata that's made available by GitHub.
And in this case here, it's the github key
which I wanna access,
which is one of the officially available keys
in the context of such a job.
So this is not an arbitrary word.
Instead, github is a reserved key name here,
a reserved word so to say.
And to make it readable, I wrap it in a function
called toJSON, which is provided by GitHub.
And you can search for GitHub actions context
to learn about the different context objects
that are available.
Here you, for example, see that github object,
which we're using right now,
and we'll see other objects throughout this course.
No worries.
And you can search for GitHub actions functions
or expressions to find this information page
about this expression feature we're using here
because this syntax here is called an expression,
which simply means we're not outputting this as plain text.
Instead, we're getting some metadata,
some context data from GitHub
and we're then converting this back to text
that can be used in the commands,
in this case, to output that data.
And since this is a data object,
we must convert it to some printable text,
and that's what this toJSON function does.
The expression syntax has a couple
of built-in functions that can be used
and toJSON is one of them.
Again, these are all things we'll explore
throughout this course
and we'll see various expressions and features
in action throughout this course.
We're just getting started with it here.
So no worries if it's not 100% clear yet.
Now, with that, however, we can save this
and we can create a new commit
for this basic workflow we created here.
So I'll commit this added output workflow
and push this to my repository, just as I did before.
Now, what this does is it creates a brand new workflow,
this output information workflow
and since this has a workflow_dispatch trigger
and only that trigger,
we have to trigger it manually,
which is what I'll do here.
With that, this workflow starts executing
and it finishes super fast
because we're just outputting some information here
but what you see in this Output GitHub context step
is that this data here,
that's all fetched from this GitHub context object.
So that's data that's provided by GitHub
to this job and step.
And that's data we could use in that step.
For example, what we see is that here we get information
about the repository
to which this job and step and workflow belongs.
This would have been useful before,
especially with that URL
if we would have manually cloned this code
for this repository instead of using this checkout action,
which we did,
which is of course better
but we could have used this metadata
to manually clone the data.
And we get a bunch of other information in here as well
as you can tell, and that's just one
of the available context objects.
There also are other objects
with other pieces of data.
For example, about the runner environment
or possible environment variables we might be using.
Again, this is something we'll explore again
and again throughout the course
and we'll dive deeper into this throughout the course.
I just wanna get you started
with expressions and this context here
or these context objects here.
It's, by the way, also this GitHub context
where we get information about the event
that triggered this workflow
and about some event data that's related to that.
But that's it for getting started with that.
It is another important feature
you should be aware of though.